Public blockchains can serve as a backbone for
nearly any democratized solution whether verifying identity,
helping Internet users gain control over their data or enhancing collaborative efforts.
Public blockchains are at the front line of the revolution because
of their permissionless design that allows anyone to participate.
In course one, you learned the value of
identity management with your private and public keys and wallet addresses.
With course two, you were introduced to the public testnet.
This is a great example of a public blockchain.
All of us are able to participate without needing permission.
It's pretty clear the power of a public blockchain,
but what does it mean to be a private blockchain?
In this video, we will discuss
the essential difference between public and private blockchains.
We'll compare them based on four atributtes; their permissions,
scalability, vulnerability and compliance. Let's get started.
First, let's look at how permissions differ between these blockchain types.
Public blockchains are open and permissionless allowing
anyone to participate or benefit from the technology.
For example, bitcoin is known for its creation of a blockchain with public protocol.
This allows for users to build and run
their own peer-to-peer transaction network without building their own ecosystem.
Anyone can participate.
This is the driving force behind public blockchains.
The success of bitcoins public protocol led to create a new platform,
which foster an open ecosystem with a public protocol.
One of these platforms has become very popular,
is known as Ethereum.
This is known as the second generation of
blockchain services and you'll be learning more about this later on in our program.
Unlike public blockchains, private blockchains require
permission to access and typically operate under centralized control.
Let's look a little more into private blockchains starting with scalability.
Private block chains benefit from efficiency in terms
of scalability and compliance with regulatory requirements.
The drawback with a private permission blockchain is the vulnerability of its network,
where bad actors could potentially manipulate its dataset
due to vulnerabilities of centralized governance.
While private blockchains have low transparency,
meaning they restrict information from being seen by the general public,
they also rely on their limited private networks
to maintain the integrity of the blockchain itself.
Public blockchains on the other hand are permissionless and can
be maintained by anyone with sufficient computing power to do so.
The public openness allows for full transparency of the information they contain.
The biggest drawback of public blockchain is scalability and regulatory compliance.
For instance, with Bitcoin Core,
transactions on the public chain are
time-restricted with new blocks being added to the chain about every 10 minutes.
This restriction improves security and controls supply yet impacts
scalability of transactions the platform can process at any given time.
As far as regulatory compliance,
a public blockchain lacks centralized control.
When new laws are created by
local governments there is limited ability to adopt those laws.
To recap, we just compared the difference between private and public blockchains,
a quick overview of permission types,
Scalability, Vulnerability and Compliance.
For more details, it's best to review
developer documentation for the platform you're interested in.
Understanding the difference will help you know when it's best to
apply a public or private blockchain depending on your use case.